---
title: 'Bio for Bob Spiegelman'
date: '2005-06-13'
author: bob-spiegelman
permalink: /bio/
author_profile: true
---
Bob Spiegelman has been a freelance author and film producer, screenwriter, project-developer, multimedia advisor, research director and story consultant on a growing array of film, museum and multimedia projects. He regularly addresses audiences across NY and Pennsylvania and is officially appointed to the highly-regarded [**Speakers List**](http://www.nyhumanities.org/) of the New York Council for the Humanities.

Dr. Spiegelman's passions are living history and preserving the environment. Over the last decade, he has been researching the watershed Sullivan-Clinton Campaign and parallel indigenous histories in [**Texas**](http://www.stakedplains.com "Texas") and [**Ireland**](http://www.derryveagh.com "Ireland"). In 2004, he began the web trilogy [**Then And Now**](http://www.thenandnow.us "Then And Now"); and developed [**_Fields of Fire_**](http://www.sullivanclinton.com/mapset/shell.swf "Mapset"), a companion, 11-scene interactive/ animated mapset, now on display at the Resource Centers of the Smithsonian Museum (NMAI) in Washington and Manhattan and the Roberson Museum in Binghamton NY. Spiegelman also designs multimedia installations, such as "The Sullivan-Clinton Campaign, 1779-2004," which showed at the American Indian Community House in Manhattan in 2005\.

His essay on the socio-cultural meanings of Sullivan/Clinton won the 225th Anniversary contest sponsored by the Booth Library-Chemung Valley Historical Society. His essay "In Memoriams: Where Landscapes of Martyrdom Meet Sites of Conscience," was published in the Mashantucket Pequod Museum's "Proceedings of the Native Americans in the American Revolution Conference (2008)." Two articles on Irish dispossession appear respectively in the Donegal Annual (2008) and Laois Heritage Journal (2008). And a revised forthcoming book, _Fields of Fire: The Sullivan/Clinton Campaign: Then & Now_ will be published in 2009\. Spiegelman has presented at the Smithsonian NMAI (NYC) and Rochester Museum & Science Center. He has advised on "Against Indian Nations," a permanent Sullivan/Clinton exhibit at Binghamton's Roberson Museum & Science Center; and curated _Spirits Return_ , an art exhibit in former Iroquois territory in Wilkes-Barre, Pa (2008). Spiegelman regularly addresses teacher workshops, maintains a curriculum guide for educators, and reaches highly-diverse audiences across New York and Pennsylvania and at times in Ireland.

Film and multimedia projects under development include: _Shattered Hearths_, a multifaceted, multimedia project on 19th century dispossession and its ongoing impact; _Taiping_, a 19th century drama of the struggle for love and personal integrity during China's Taiping Rebellion, history's second bloodiest war; _Old Shanghai_, a Chinatown-like drama of murder and love, set amidst intrigues that led up to WWII; _Due North_, a saga of one indigenous woman's wrenching quest for identity amidst the siren calls of crossover stardom; _Shanghai Reverie_, a documentary series on legendary old Shanghai; and, lastly, two documentary film projects on the Sullivan-Clinton Campaign and on the Gilded Age.

Other texts in progress include: _Staked Plains_, a true 19th century history of entitlement and dispossession, recounted through an eminent Victorian couple, whose traces and deeds still reverberate today; _Old Shanghai_, a novel of the struggle for love during historical upheaval political intrigue; _To the Global Station_: an analysis of the origins of globalization in the womb and aftermath of World War II; and _Scarcity and Abundance_, a study of how these twin notions have impacted American culture and social thought.

Dr. Spiegelman is producer-director for _Up South_, an in-depth look at race relations in the Hudson Valley, currently in development. He was research director and lead interviewer for the 6-part documentary, _Muhammad Ali: The Whole Story_, segments of which aired on TNT. (On this, he worked with Robert Lipsyte, senior sportswriter of the New York Times and Leon Gast, director of the Oscar-winning _When We Were Kings_; and interviewed figures like William F. Buckley, Jr., Paul Robeson, Jr. and numerous boxing greats and journalists.) Spiegelman has been a script and media advisor. He has developed epic-scale film projects on China's 20th century revolution, working with Oscar-winner Ron Bass (Rain Man); and _Taiping_, based on China's 19th century Taiping revolution, with Oscar-nominee Zachary Sklar (JFK). He is also a co-producer of two epics-in-progress:_The Wounding,_ a work in-progress on the 18th century Euro-Indian wars in North America and _Staked Plains/Shattered Hearths,_ an 19th century epic saga of love and revenge in the first Gilded Age.

Dr. Spiegelman's reviews and feature articles have appeared in venues including the _Donegal Annual_, the _Laois Heritage Journal, _International Documentary_, the _Chemung History Journal_, _The Guardian_ (US), and _Social Policy_ magazine, (which sparked commentary in the _Columbia Journalism Review_). He holds a Ph.D. in Sociology from the City University of New York, an M.A. in Philosophy from the University of Michigan, and a B.A. in Philosophy from Queens College (CUNY).
